# Introduction

Welcome to Chai Tour!  The tour is an interactive beginner's guide to the Chai
programming language.  It is intended for anyone who wants to learn the
language, although previous programming experience may be helpful.

This tour is split into **chapters**.  Each chapter contains a **lesson** which
covers some topic or topics in the language.  At the end of the lesson, there
will be a **problem statement** which describes some problem you will need to
solve using Chai.  This content will be contained in the left-hand panel as you
can see on this page.

The right-hand panel contains an interactive instance of the **playground**.
This is an environment where you can run Chai code in the browser powered by
[WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/).  The playground itself is split
vertically into an **editor** where you will write your code and a **console**
where you can see the output of the code.  The editor will often contain some
code which has already been written for you along with comments to indicate
where to insert your code.  

At the top right of the playground, you will see three buttons.  The first
(leftmost) button is the **run button** which run your code and print its output
to the console below.  The second button is the **test button** which will test
your code's output against the correct output from the problem so you can see if
you have solved it. Finally, the last button is the **solution button** which
will allow you to see our solution to the problem.  We really encourage you
*not* to use this button unless you are really stuck or have already finished
the problem and want to see an alternative solution.  Note that you can click
this button again to toggle back to your code.

Returning the left-hand panel, at the top of the lesson panel, you will see
several navigation buttons (previous at the far left and next at the far right)
along with a label for the chapter.  You can click on this label to trigger a
drop down which will allow you to jump to other chapters.  Importantly, this
navigation can be used *at any time*: you do not have to complete or even
attempt a chapter's problem to move on to the next one.  Any code you write in
the editor will be saved into your session cookie (yes, I know, cookies ugh!) so
you can return to it at any time later.

Now that you have read that wall of text, you should see a program in the editor
to your right.  This is the *Hello World* program in Chai.  Go ahead and run it
to make sure you know how to operate the playground.  We will talk more about
the construction of the program in the next chapter.
