# Introduction

Welcome to the Chai Start-Up Guide!  This guide will walk you through the basics
of the Chai programming language and help you to write useful programs as fast
as possible.  This guide is principally intended for those with some prior
programming experience: this allows us to move through the mundane topics to get
to the more interesting concepts which are unique to Chai.

To that end, this guide takes a more pragmatic approach to teaching the
language.  Some topics will be skipped entirely if they are not really relevant
to most users or abridged for the sake of concision.  Additionally, this guide
will place an additional focus on the standard library: many chapters will cover
some important standard library tools and functions for doing things like
standard I/O, file I/O, string manipulation, collection transformations, and
even networking and concurrency.

You will find that this guide has been broken into bite-sized chapters for you
to work through at your own pace.  You probably won't finish this guide in one
day, especially if you are taking your time to really understand the material.
Even if you are a more seasoned programmer, you may find that Chai does things
a little bit differently than you may be used to. 

As you read, you will find that many chapters include one or more *exercises*
sprinkled throughout their content.  Here is an example of an exercise:

<guide-exercise label="0.1"></guide-exercise>

These exercises are designed to help you practice what you are learning and to
encourage you to play around with the language and get a feel for how to use it.
We strongly recommend that you try and complete as many of the exercises as you
can because it will help cement what you are learning and make sure you don't
move to quickly over things you might not actually understand.  

Now, without further adieu, it is time to begin your journey into learning the
Chai programming language.  Let us begin...